# Design Meeting Minutes: 2025/04/29

> NOTE: Please read the [terms of participation](DesignMeetingTerms.txt)
> ("Terms") prior to joining the Teams meeting.  You joining the Teams meeting
> with Microsoft indicates your acknowledgement, agreement, and consent to these
> Terms.  If you do not agree to these Terms, please do not join the meeting.
>
> If you intend to contribute code or other copyrightable materials (e.g.
> written comments, tools, documentation, etc.)  to the hlsl specs repository,
> you are required to sign a Contributor License Agreement (CLA).  For details,
> visit https://cla.microsoft.com.

## Administrivia
* No updates

## Issues
* No marked issues

## PRs

### Carried Forward

* [[dxil] Proposal to add new debug printf dxil op](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/324)
  * @pow2clk and @tex3d will review this in more detail.
* [[202x] Propose adding vk::SampledTexture* types](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/343)
  * Ready to merge.
* [Add proposal for scalar layout for constant buffers](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/317)
  * Action Item @llvm-beanz - Move to merge.
* [Introduce really rough linalg matrix proposal](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/404)
  * Action Item: @llvm-beanz to merge
* [Rough proposal collecting thoughts on uniformity](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/405)
  * Action Item: @llvm-beanz to update
* [New Proposal: Draft proposal to modify resource typing in HLSL](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/461)
  * Action item: @llvm-beanz to work with author

### Current Business
* [[Decl.Init.Agg] Arrays of unknown size](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/469)
  * Ready for review
* [Add an initial proposal for HLSL 202x deprecations](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/488)
* Constant Buffers!
  * [Constant buffers language spec - initial draft](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/419)
  * [Constant Buffer Contexts](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/497)
  * What is the correct relationship between `cbuffer` and `namespace`?
    * [Some fun cbuffer examples](https://godbolt.org/z/GcKes6Eeh)

### SM 6.9

* [Long vector test plan](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/421)
* [Cooperative Vectors Test Plan](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/428)
* [[0029] Update example code to use real API](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/472)
* [[0030][SM6.9] Add list of ops with vector overload](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/481)
* [[0029] Make "input signed op kind"s be "is input unsigned" and booleans](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/483)
* [[0027] Avoid using undef for dx.op.MaybeReorderThread](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/487)

## Other Discussion
